---
layout: project
title: Updated Linear Actuator Mechanism Design
description: A frame/mechanism containing a linear actuator, designed to lift maximum possible weight, highest possible height, achieving mass efficiency
technologies: [Notability]
image: /assets/images/Updated 2025 Linear Actuator Mechanism (1).jpeg
image: /assets/images/Updated 2025 Linear Actuator Mechanism (2).jpeg
---


As part of a homework assigment for my Statics and Mechanics of Solids course, I was asked to design a frame/mechanism that contained a linear actuator and could lift the maximum possible weight to the highest possible height, given a few restrictions. The frame/mechanism had to be limited to a 2D design space of 150cm (length) by 50cm (height), and had to contain a rigid bar of fixed length, 3 pin supports, and a linear actuator from the Tolomatic linear actuator online catalog (https://www.tolomatic.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/2700-4000_29_IMA_cat.pdf). The length of the rigid bar was a design choice I had to make and 2 of the 3 pin supports were required to be mounted to the ground.

Frame/Mechanism Design:({{ "/assets/images/Updated 2025 Linear Actuator Mechanism (1).jpeg" | relative_url }}){: .inline-image-r style="width: 200px"}

For my frame/mechanism design, I chose to use the RSX linear actuator from the catalog as it provides the largest maximum force out of all of the other actuators, meaning it would be able to support the largest weight. Once I identified the RSX as my chosen actuator, I decided to create a triangular frame with a height of 50cm as the goal of the design was to lift the largest amount of weight, the highest possible height, and the height maximum is 50cm given the restricted 2D design space. The reason I chose to make the length of the rigid bar 140cm was because I wanted the linear actuator to be pinned at a large angle relative to the horizonital, so that most of the force it was providing went directly into supporting the load. To further elaborate, as the weight of the load provides a strict downward vertical force on the frame/mechanism, I deduced that it would be best and most efficient for the actuator to maximize its vertical force and minimize its horizontal force, necessitating a large angle between the actuator and the horizonal (as shown in the image above). With these design parameters, I created a frame/mechanism with a linear actuator pinned to the ground at an angle of 69.0° from the horizontal and a 140cm rigid bar pinned to the ground 150cm away from the linear actuator, with the two connecting at a pin (the load point) 50cm high and 19.2cm away from the linear actuator. 

In step 1 of the problem, I conducted a static analysis of my mechanism design where the only forces acting on the mechanism were the force of the linear actuator, the weight of the rigid bar, and the reaction forces at pin C. The value of the force of the linear actuator was 294kN as this is the maximum force that the RSX linear actuator from the catalog provides. Taking the sum of the moments about pin C, I determined the weight of the rigid bar to be 629.4kN and the reactions at pin C to be 105.4kN in the negative x-direction and 354.9kN in the positive y-direction.

Frame/Mechanism Design:({{ "/assets/images/Updated 2025 Linear Actuator Mechanism (2).jpeg" | relative_url }}){: .inline-image-r style="width: 200px"}

In step 2 of the problem, the mechanism was no longer rigid, and I was tasked with choosing a beam material and cross-section such that the beam's vertical deflection due to its weight was below 2% of its length while being as mass-efficient as possible. I made the assumption that the linear actuator provides a transverse force in the positive y-direction on the mechanism like the reaction of a roller support. In my free body diagram, the only force acting on the system, of the beam and the supports was the weight of the beam, previously determined in step 1. Using 2% of the length of the beam and appendix E in the textbook to find a deflection equation that accurately described the situation of the mechanism, the bending stiffness of the beam was determined to be greater than 1.285 x 10^5 Nm^2 in order to meet the design requirements. The material chosen for the beam was structural steel and the chosen cross-section was C75 x 6.1, which corresponds to a bending stiffness of 1.374 Nm^2 and an efficient mass of 8.517kg. 